     A profound change has taken place in the world of thought. The
pews are trying to set themselves somewhat above the pulpit, The
layman discusses theology with the minister, and smiles. Christians
excuse themselves for belonging to the church, by denying a part of
the creed. The idea is abroad that they who know the most of nature
believe the least about theology. The sciences are regarded as
infidels, and facts as scoffers. Thousands of most excellent people
avoid churches, and, with few exceptions, only those attend prayer-
meetings who wish to be alone. The pulpit is losing because the
people are growing.
     Of course it is still claimed that we are a Christian people,
indebted to something called Christianity for all the progress we
have made. There is still a vast difference of opinion as to what
Christianity really is, although many warring sects have been
discussing that question, with fire and sword, through centuries of
creed and crime. Every new sect has been denounced at its birth as
illegitimate, as a something born out of orthodox wedlock, and that
should have been allowed to perish on the steps where it was found.
Of the relative merits of the various denominations, it is
sufficient to say that each claims to be right. Among the
evangelical churches there is a substantial agreement upon what
they consider the fundamental truths of the gospel. These
fundamental truths, as I understand them, are: 
     That there is a personal God, the creator of the material
universe; that he made man of the dust, and woman from part of the
man; that the man and woman were tempted by the devil; that they
were turned out of the Garden of Eden; that, about fifteen hundred
years afterward, God's patience having been exhausted by the
wickedness of mankind, he drowned his children with the exception
of eight persons; that afterward he selected from their descendants
                         Bank of Wisdom
                  Box 926, Louisville, KY 40201
                                1
                   THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION - I
                       Robert G. Ingersoll
Abraham, and through him the Jewish people; that he gave laws to
these people, and tried to govern them in all things; that he made
known his will in many ways that he wrought a vast number of
miracles; that he inspired men to write the Bible; that, in the
fullness of time, it having been found impossible to reform
mankind, this God came upon earth as a child born of the Virgin
Mary; that he lived in Palestine; that he preached for about three
years, going from place to place, occasionally raising the dead,
curing the blind and the halt; that he was crucified for the crime
of blasphemy, as the Jews supposed, but that, as a matter of fact,
he was offered as a sacrifice for the sins of all who might have
faith in him; that he was raised from the dead and ascended into
heaven, where he now is, making intercession for his followers that
he will forgive the sins of all who believe on him, and that those
who do not believe will be consigned to the dungeons of eternal
pain. These it may be with the addition of the sacraments of
Baptism and the Last Supper constitute what is generally known as
the Christian religion.
     It is most cheerfully admitted that a vast number of people
not only believe these things, but hold them in exceeding
reverence, and imagine them to be of the utmost importance to
mankind. They regard the Bible as the only light that God has given
for the guidance of his children; that it is the one star in
nature's sky the foundation of all morality, of all law, of all
order, and of all individual and national progress. They regard it
as the only means we have for ascertaining the will of God, the
origin of man, and the destiny of the soul.
     It is needless to inquire into the causes that have led so
many people to believe in the inspiration of the Scriptures. In my
opinion, they were and are mistaken, and the mistake has hindered,
in countless ways, the civilization of man. The Bible has been the
fortress and defence of nearly every crime. No civilized country
could re-enact its laws, and in many respects its moral code is
abhorrent to every good and tender man. It is admitted that many of
its precepts are pure, that many of its laws are wise and just, and
that many of its statements are absolutely true.
